Understanding Heurist 

**The Essential Guide 2025**

Chapter 1 : Overview

*Commenced: 12 Jan 2024*

Main authors: Ian Johnson, Maël Le Noc (2023 - 2025), Michael Falk
(2021-2022), Vincent Sheehan (2016-2020) 

Assisted by: Pierre-Yves Saunier, 

Note: Menu options are indicated as in:  **Populate > CSV import
**            (the CSV import function within the top level Populate
menu)

*We do not include a table of contents here because the
outline/navigation modes provide better navigation *

   .. image:: media/image1.png
      :width: 3.625in
      :height: 1.60417in

   .. image:: media/image2.png
      :width: 3.1875in
      :height: 2.35417in

What is Heurist ?
=================

Heurist website (
`http://HeuristNetwork.org <http://heuristnetwork.org/>`__ ) 

<short intro to essentials>

Specific reasons for using Heurist

-  Developed by and for Humanities research in collaboration with
   hundreds of research projects

-  Not tied to any specific project or type of data, handles a broad
   range of Humanities projects\*

-  Puts development and management of databases in the hands of the user
   rather than the IT priesthood

-  Rapid set up of complex interlinked databases typical of the
   Humanities, without programming

-  Iterative changes to database structure without corrupting or
   rebuilding existing data

-  Wide range of data import, export and analysis/visualisation
   functions

-  Stable CMS web sites generated and stored as an integral part of the
   database

-  Free and Open Source on GitHub, all data stored in MySQL in a
   comprehensively documented format

-  Instant archive packages in XML and standard SQL with internal
   documentation

-  Designed to be centrally maintenance at low cost shared by many
   projects

-  Humanities-knowledgeable core team and community of users

..

   \* *No one system can do everything; Heurist is a generic system
   designed around the needs of a broad cohort of Humanities projects
   needing rich interlinked data / metadata databases. It cannot be
   expected to provide all the domain-secific features of tools
   developed for a specific application such as text analysis, on-site
   archaeological recording or spatial analysis, but may still provide a
   means of collecting and managing data which is later fed into
   specific analysis suites such as R, QGis, Gephi, TAPOR etc.. *

Learning Resources
==================

This document aims to give a reasonably concise but comprehensive
narrative of Heurist functionality in an order that corresponds as far
as possible with a typical engagement with Heurist. It cross-references
to the project website, training materials and pages in the online Help
system which give more detailed information and are organised in menu
order.

**Website**

There are a range of learning resources, FAQs and links to exemplar
projects on the Heurist Network website:

   `http://HeuristNetwork.org <http://heuristnetwork.org/>`__

   .. image:: media/image3.png
      :width: 3.55208in
      :height: 2.39583in

**Online help**

Our main online help, delivered from a Heurist database via the Heurist
CMS, is available at:

 https://heuristref.net/Heurist_Help_System 

.. image:: media/image4.png
   :width: 3.54167in
   :height: 2.04167in

**Tutorial videos**

A series of 8 (as at Jan 2024) tutorial videos have been created by Dr
Michael Falk. These are available in the Learn section of the Heurist
Network website at  https://heuristnetwork.org/tutorials/ 

The videos are accompanied by a text and annotated images which
describes the steps to follow through using training data. These texts
and images have been used as a basis for some sections of the current
document.

   .. image:: media/image5.png
      :width: 4.25in
      :height: 2.42708in

**Exemplar websites**

Annotated examples of Heurist-generated websites are on the Featured
Projects page: 

https://heuristnetwork.org/featured-projects/ 

   .. image:: media/image6.png
      :width: 3.97917in
      :height: 1.58333in

Additional projects can be accessed through the Projects Search page
https://heuristnetwork.org/projects-search/ (not currently available at
8 Jan 2024 @TODO)

**FAQ**

A set of answers to common questions. This was created pre 2020, and
would no longer cover all the frequently asked questions, but the
answers are generally still valid.
